If Air is to be considered “art” then so is carbon monoxide and project graffiti. Introducing an abundance of clichés in the first four minutes alone, Air is a blue ribbon example of what art is not- unimaginative, derivative, and devoid of any need for interpretation. In a genre where nothing is ever new, Air, like Kanon, tries to be different by implementing elements of the bizarre to otherwise ordinary characters in an ordinary world. Also like Kanon, it fails miserably because the fantastical borders on the inane, the story wastes time on things that ultimately do not matter, and the characters are flatter than my….um, no….er, flatter than pancakes. 

Air is comprised of many little things that aggravate me; everything from the mascot from the requisite prepubescent just made my blood-pressure rise. Oh, and let's not forget the recap. A recap in a thirteen-episode anime. Normally, these will be very minor complaints, but Air made them significant because every time something half-way decent will happen it will be marred by that damn dog endlessly piko-pikoing in the background or that little girl bumping into the protagonist for the umpteenth time. A great example would be a suitable scene between Yukito and Kano in an early episode. Instead of feeling guilty for something beautiful, you should be grateful for it. [sarcasm] That’s, like, so deep. [end sarcasm] Too bad this scene was ruined by an incredibly hackneyed act. This is unfortunate because you can imagine how I reacted to much more important things, such as the sloppy and sometimes ridiculous story and sappy dialogue. 

Although the story is not without potential, it is completely ruined by those aforementioned little things and the bigger things. For starters, there is an ungodly amount of time wasted outlining characters I couldn’t have cared less about. And what’s more, these characters are completely insignificant to the story as a whole. It’s not until the last few episodes that the script becomes something decent: Air is not about Yukito. It is not about Misuzu or even about the damn air. When the creators finally decide they didn’t want the anime to be about everyone and their grandmother but the relationship between Misuzu and her mother and sacrifices, it’s too little too late because they spent episode upon episode on attempting to make boring characters less boring, but more importantly, I didn't care about Misuzu or her mother.

When the poor story isn’t being rampant, it’s being preposterous. As mentioned before, the inanity clashes with the mundane, and as a result, Air has the most ridiculous things I’ve ever seen in an anime- second only to becoming the reincarnation of a dead fox. Smack dab in the middle of the anime there is an incongruous two-episode story arc. This arc (occurring a millennia or two before current events) served two purposes: one is to spell out what any viewer with an iota of common sense surmised three or four episodes before; secondly, to manipulate and reduce any weak-hearted soul to a crying gag. As inconsequential as this arc may have been, it’s the best part of the series. This is not because the new-found cast is interesting per se but because the events that happen at this point are the most interesting. But do not misunderstand me. I am not lauding this anime for having two decent episodes. Instead, I am emphasizing its lameness by the fact that two episodes that could have been cut out with three characters I couldn’t have cared less about is the best Air had to offer. Last but certainly not least, there’s the dialogue. Some people may find it in themselves to take such talk seriously. Some people may even find it “touching.” I’m certainly not one of those people, and there were many times during this anime where I didn’t know whether to laugh or vomit. 

Air is not a love story, yet it is classified as “romance.” This is to be expected; however, it is worth noting that Yukito, the supposed main character with the personality of a toothpick, has absolutely no concrete purpose in the series. Yes, the audience learns how Yukito can control a puppet-no strings attached- and that he’s searching for a “winged girl in the sky” but knowing these unimportant things have very little impact on the series itself. In fact, Yukito could have been completely erased from the anime (as evidenced by the climax) and very little about Air would change. When Yukito is just another non-descript male lead, Misuzu manages to be even worse. Innocence, genuine innocence, is difficult to convey in a character that is not a child; several tidbits about Misuzu are fed to the audience, such as her annoying habit of saying “gau” all the time and her youthful belief that a chick is a dinosaur’s child. Air fails to understand that innocence and stupidity are two completely different things and Misuzu is far and away the latter. Shu (from Now and Then, Here and There) is a character that truly fits the bill. He was innocent-even naïve-not because he has one word in his vocabulary and falls over himself all the time, but because he never quite understood the cruelties of the human heart, despite that it was all around him. Air, however, simply inputs a six-year-old mentality into an older character. I will simply call it the way it’s painted and the way I see it: Misuzu is stupid, not innocent. 

If there’s something truly good about Air it’s the fact that I wasn’t disappointed; it met my expectations and did exactly what I knew it would do. It tried hard and failed in every possible way, especially with its characters. Instead of giving each character a defining and established personality, the anime decides to take the cop-out approach: each character is given a so-called “tragic” story that is supposed to make up for their undeniable banality. The entire series is this way and it doesn’t work….at least not with me. 

Animation 
It’s a shame the character designs are terrible because the actual animation is very good. There are very pretty shots of sunsets (nice color blend with yellows and reddish oranges); just about every view of the sky is a site for sore eyes. And there’s a great scene when two characters are frolicking in water.

Sound 
I’ve decided long ago that if a show has more than one character with an annoyingly cutesy voice, I’m automatically scoring less than a six. Voice acting is horrendous and this extends to the male characters, as well. Yukito has a very uninspired and bland voice. Every girl sounds and looks like an eight-year-old. Their voices are even more irritating when accompanied by the background music. At one point, I had to put the anime on mute (NOT a good thing) because I was very highly irritated by a cheesy song that plays while a character is screaming (in a teary, melodramatic voice) another character’s name. On the upside, the opening theme is quite good. Surprise, surprise. 

Value 
Unless you’re a real sucker for anime like Air, I absolutely do not
recommend this. If you liked Kanon, this is up your alley…and vice
versa.
