Oh, bloody hell, here we go again. 

I wanted to like Air. Hell, I wanted to love Air. I wanted it to bear me some mini-otaku-squirrel children. But just as I fell head over heels, the series turned into my ex-girlfriend: schizophrenic attention-seeking bitch who can't decide what she's all about. 

It's one of those shows that just absolutely cannot decide what it wants to be or who it wants to be about. Air starts off as an excellent romantic drama with a lot of good comedic elements, segues into a completely unnecessary flashback sequence, then when it returns to the main arc, the focus has gone...sideways. And not in a good way.

Summary: I can't summarize this. It's too painful. Here's the best you're going to get: Guy comes to town, meets some girls, fantastic and weird things happen, story ends. Yes. That's all there is to it, unfortunately. 

Animation
Character Design: There is absolutely nothing wrong with the animation. Some people may not like their art style - the eyes are VERY stylistic and the faces are a little strange, but I personally think it makes the girls look amazingly cute. 

Misuzu is amazingly cute. This is a good thing. Her mother is amazingly cute, this is also a good thing. The other girls are also amazingly cute, except the doctor, who is merely passably cute. I like looking at cute girls, even animated ones. 

As for the guys, well, there's only a couple, and they look pretty cool. Nice spiky hairdos, lanky, badass. About the only issue with character design in this anime is that some of the characters have sticks for legs. I mean, seriously, if my legs were that skinny, I wouldn't be able to stand up. 

Op/Ed: Nothing really special here, but both are drawn well enough. 

Artwork: Another strong point, the art is terrific. Very few stills or repeated animations, lots of detail and background for their scenes, and good effects. The animation and art for this series is its strongest point. 

Sound
Op/Ed: The opening is great! I love a good song and Air delivers on that score. The ending song isn't quite as good, but both were good enough to find their way to my playlist. They were also good enough to encourage me to watch the op/ed for each episode...at least, each episode that I actually watched. When you have an op/ed that actually fit the design of the series, you know that the creators actually put some thought into it. Too many series just get some weak ass J-pop or J-ballad stuck on each end and expect adulation. 

Voices: Decent voicework, quite decent. Misuzu has a wonderful voice, very childish and fitting for her character. And you have to love it whenever she says "Gao!" Yukito sounded pretty decent to me as well, maybe needed a little more depth to his speaking tones, but all the voice actors did a pretty good job on this. I did really like the smart girl's way of speaking - it was slow but measured, like she was actually (gasp) thinking about what she was saying. Nice effect.

Music: The background music was ok. As usual, just a few key tunes were repeated, and as is par for the course, a good inset song was inserted into the penultimate episode. 

Story
Plot: This is where the series collapses. The continuity sucks. All right? There are thirteen episodes. You get through the first six or seven and all of a sudden, you're hit with a flashback. For two episodes. Out of thirteen. All right, that's fine...but then, the next episode is a recap. A RECAP? And then the entire focus of the story changes. Almost every character from the first half is gone, except for cameos. And then you hit episode 12 and it ends. So what's episode 13? ANOTHER RECAP. 

Who the fuck designed that shit? I'm sorry to be so coarse about it, but wow, I've never felt my intelligence so insulted by an anime before. 

Character usage is ridiculous as well. The show flickers between three primary viewpoint characters. Why? One of them is the flashback. Why? One of them vanishes from the story for all intents and purposes. Why? There's no good reason. 

One of the reasons for this is because I think that Key designed Air to be the opposite of Kanon (which I DO love madly - bring on the new version!). Summer as opposed to winter. Trouble is, the summer fades into fall and winter - whereas the winter blooms into spring and summer. Air seems to get progressively worse as the series progresses and the payoff sucks, whereas Kanon has a payoff that is entirely worth watching the series for. 

Writing: I take a LOT of offense to this series on the scripting and writing level. I write a fair amount and one thing you learn is that a flashback is NOT a wonderfully useful tool. They are dangerous and difficult and will make your story suck if you use them poorly.

Air has a very poor flashback. It breaks the continuity of the series to the point where the writers thought we needed a recap. That should have tipped them off right there. The flashback also told us things that we had already somewhat guessed, and stuff that didn't really make a difference anyways. Half an episode, sure - but two full episodes brought plot progression to a grinding halt.

And then you get back from the flashback, and the story focus has completely changed. Yukito is no longer the focus. Misuzu is the focus. Her mother is the focus - and you thought she was just a joke character? She was! Now she's getting developed while the rest are gone! Why?

Some people think that a 4 is pretty low for this category, but I stand by this rating for two primary reasons: while the plot and story were fair enough, the implementation was some of the worst I've ever seen. It's like seeing Evangelion made into a musical. The message, meaning, and point might still be there, but DAMN. 

Character
Interest: How can you stay interested in the characters if they vanish from the series? Especially those poor girls - the weird one and the smart one - both were decent enough characters. I really liked the smart one - she had a wonderful slow, composed manner of speaking. The little girl was cool too. See? I can't even remember their names - they were never a part of the story again after their two episodes on stage.

The only character that is really fully developed is Misuzu, and she's fairly interesting, in that she's such a tragic character in the end. It's especially painful to see her regress, especially because it's so non-sensical and seemingly unwarranted. 

Growth: Zilch. Well, ok, Misuzu's mom grows a little at the end. You're supposed to see how Yukito transforms some of the girls by being around them, etc etc, shades of Kanon - but just like Kanon, the girls are gone after their time on stage and you never actually see what really happened to them. 

My main gripe with the characters is just that there are several characters introduced over the course of the anime, but none of them actually matter except for Mizuzu and her mother, with a pinch of Yukito. I would have preferred to have seen the series focus on them all the way through, rather than dance around for the first two thirds of the show.

Value and Enjoyment: Well, I can't give this a good score for value - two recaps out of 13 episodes is pathetic. They could have removed those episodes. Hell, they could have removed half of the cast, and maybe the entire first half of the anime, actually the first two thirds...yeah. That's pretty bad value. 

Enjoyment...well, obviously, I didn't enjoy the show all that much. I did think that the end would have been great if they had actually put some effort into it. And the first half of the show was a great blend of comedic and dramatic moments. "Is your omelette ok? It doesn't taste like...cicadas?" is quite possibly one of the best throwaway gags in an anime, ever. I did like the cuteness and the music. I just hate how the show threw its direction all over the place. It's like what would happen if you picked up Harry Potter book 7 and learned that he's not using magic, he's using the Force, and he's an ancestor of Kenobi or something. It's that jarring. Well, maybe not THAT jarring.

Conclusion: I really did want to like Air. I loved Kanon and I loved the cameo of the three girls early on. I loved the beginning of the series, but this is the classic bitch who lures you in and then turns out to be a psychohosebeast in the morning. You have a great one night stand and wake up in her bed with a dead chicken on your chest, strange red paint all over the walls, and she's huddled in a corner alternating crying and blaming you for how much her life sucks. That's Air.

At that point, you just make the quickest exit you possibly can.
