Shoujo Kakumei Utena is one of those stories that somehow manages to be delightful, creepy, refreshing, dark, and honestly moving, all at the same time. Actually, I can't really think of anything else like it. It delivers lots of ideas on your plate, some developed, some left to your imagination, and many things I'd not seen dealt with before in anime, or dealt with in very different ways. Memories, miracles, individuality, standing up for and holding onto your ideals, growing up (some cliche/cheesy stuff, but some really deep ideas too), and of course Utena herself, who certainly stands out in a crowd!

Like lots of the anime I watch, Utena was recommended to me by a good friend. I must admit that at first I was a little skeptical of the excessive length of the series and the strong shoujo feel it projects at the very beginning. (I'm a guy; the friend who recommended it is a girl.) I'll say one thing right away: if either of these factors is what's keeping you from watching Utena, don't let it stop you! Yes, Utena was the first "shoujo" anime I watched, but after having seen and appreciated the whole series, I don't even think it's fitting to classify it like this, any more than it would be appropriate to classify Evangelion or RahXephon as shounen anime. Sure there are roses everywhere, bright colorful hair, secret diaries, ballroom dancing, romances, little sisters overly fond of their big brothers, and on and on and on... What sets Utena apart is that these aren't glorified ideals for little girls to indulge in doting upon while they watch, but objects of satire and part of the petty, confining world of gender expectations and ordinary society from which Utena is destined to break free.

Shoujo Kakumei Utena is, as the title suggests, a story about revolution. It's hard to say quite what sense this word should be taken in, and in fact the viewer will find himself or herself questioning what "kakumei" really means many times as the story progresses. Utena herself outright denies that she wants the power to revolutionize the world, and in the end you'll still be asking yourself: did she or didn't she bring a revolution?

What Utena does see herself doing is striving to maintain the princely nobility she found as a child, standing up for her friends and even her enemies as their hearts are abused and manipulated through a creepy dueling game set forth to win the power to revolutionize the world. From here develops a tale of holding onto childhood ideals while becoming an adult, reconciling one's hopes and dreams and delusions with reality, finding one's sexual identity, and breaking free from destructive and abusive relationships -- all the way from the first duel for the Rose Bride with Saionji to the crazy ending.

In an old discussion in the AnimeReactor forum, Utena once was cited as the "most liberal" anime. Althought there are quite a few traits that could have won it this moniker, in my mind the most poignant one is its rejection of conventional gender roles and sexual violence. That's not to say it lacks sexual abuse (this is not a series for young children!) nor that other anime doesn't deal with androgeny or homosexuality. But in a world where yuri and yaoi fans look forward to unwanted advances, forced kisses, and sexual manipulation, and where many hentai fans are so "hardcore" they won't even watch a series unless it contains glorified rape, Shoujo Kakumei Utena is the one anime I've seen take a stance against the status quo, and that in itself makes it revolutionary. Utena and Anshi are not flaming lesbians like the opening might lead you to believe; both consider themselves heterosexual. Shoujo Kakumei Utena asks questions like: Can a girl be the prince of another girl's dreams? ...even if she's straight? How does gender define and limit people's relationships to one another? Don't expect rejections to turn into love through constant application of sexual harassment, unrequited love to suddenly be rewarded, or everything to magically turn out lovely and happy. Many of the relationship situations in Utena don't have any happy way out, and whatever happens, someone has to get hurt.

As much as the subject matter of Utena is serious, though, it isn't without warm, splendid moments of comedy either. The regularly-spaced episodes that focus on Touga's little sister Nanami are without fail some of the best humor I've ever seen in anime, feeding off of her combined spitefullness, self-absorbed nature, and 'udder' gullibility. (Pardon the blatent pun!) Sometimes they lighten things up just when a break from the tension is needed, and keep the story from turning into something darker than it should be.

As far as structure goes, I've seen Utena compared multiple times with both fairy tales and Shakespearean drama, sometimes even the two combined. Patterns and repetition flow throughout the series, and at first some of these really annoyed me as one of the few traits detracting from Utena. They grew on me a lot as the series progressed, and now I must say the only way I see them as really detracting is by making this series inaccessible to many potential viewers. The most notable repetitions are the "childhood fairy tale opening", the shadow theater, and the duels, particularly the duel opening, during which the same cells are reused again and again throughout half the episodes. At this point, I should comment that lots of the animation in Utena leaves a bit to be desired. Reused cells, frequent scenes with little motion, and lack of any animation for the "final blow" in most duels all detract somewhat from the technical excellence of the anime. On the other hand, I really like the character drawing style, the expressiveness and emotion of the characters, and the overall artistry. The opening and closing animations are beautiful (although the second closing is leagues beyond the first) and convey so much of the characters' inner feelings that can't be expressed openly.

With the opening and ending animation come the songs, which are themselves a huge part of the excellence of Utena. Be sure to listen to the full version of Rinbu since there's a whole lot more to it than fits in the opening, and read the translated lyrics if you don't understand Japanese. Truth is good...the English lyrics in it don't really fit and make you question whether the lyricist understood the English language at all, but as the series progresses you'll find it really reflective of the state Utena is living in. Another beautiful song you don't want to miss is Hikarisasu Niwa, Miki's piano piece, which features in the story. As for the duel songs, they're weird. I'm not sure if I like them or not, even after several viewings, but they are memorable and play a big role in setting the atmosphere. Certainly not the sort of thing I'd want to just sit and listen to, though.

It goes without saying that Utena has a strong allegorical element to it (see the duel song titles), and one would be mistaken to take everything that happens in the anime quite at face value. In fact, one might see large portions of the series as simply illusions, or even delusions, in the minds of certain characters. As such, characters should not necessarily be seen as striving to be "realistic", but nor are they just stuck in to reflect singular human flaws or traits. From the beginning the Student Council is set up to play the antagonist role, and later on other characters begin to fill in here as well. But as the story progresses, each character is revealed to have intricate reasons behind their action. They're all human, all guided by childhood memories and driven to lust for the ideals that will right what went wrong in their lives, all trapped like the chick who cannot break the shell of its egg.

With 39 episodes in all, Utena gives you enough time to get attached to the characters, even the unlikable ones like Nanami. At times this can make it painful, but overall Utena is simply a fun series to watch. The random humor stuck in just where it's needed, the eccentric, almost-deranged episode structure, and Utena's personal sincerity make for a one-of-a-kind masterpiece.

Like most good anime, Utena has a confusing ending. Beyond that, all I
will say is that I found it the most completely satisfying moment I'd
ever seen in anime. Quirky and faithful to Utena's personality to the
last!
