The amount of anime titles in existence encompasses a huge list, ranging from the popular to the obscure. At the popular end, you have anime like Bleach and Naruto, and at the other end, you have rarer titles like Texhnolyze. Even in this maelstrom, there are some anime which are so notable for their worth, they have a reputation behind them. These titles are known by everyone, even if you haven't seen it, you've heard it being talked about it somewhere or another. Utena happens to be one of those titles. I was recommended Utena years ago when I first entered the world of anime, and have managed to find ways to put it off for an enormous length of time. Finally, I got myself around to watching this anime great, and now to writing a review about it.

When I finished watching Utena and decided I would write a review, I was tempted to give it two scores. One of these scores was significantly lower than the other, and I'll detail the reasons for this in the ''Story'' section. Till then, I suggest you keep a big ''caveat emptor'' in mind while reading the review, so you know that I was tempted to review it another way.

Animation

The animation of Utena was, plainly put, atrocious. I rarely, if ever, place much emphasis on animation when enjoying an anime, but the anime of Utena was so horrible that it deserves an honorable mention. Well, truth be told, the animation of most of Utena itself is pretty solid. The character shapes reflect the natural Shoujo bias of anime of its style, regal looking women with gorgeous men. Typical of older anime, Utena sports slightly odd proportioned characters, with the occasional change in facial features. Also, Utena comes with quite a bit of fan service (which, for me, was totally unexpected from the impressions other people had given me about the title), but this is total Shoujo fan service. Near the end of the series, you'll notice guys opening their shirts and their flies (why they do this is beyond me, but I'm not complaining . Still, the worst part about the animation of Utena is the shameless use of repeated frames. Just about every episode sports a good repeated minute or so composed of the duel intros (more on this later), even though the music during these repeated frames are probably the only reason anyone wouldn't skip them. Plus, you have a series introduction thing (you'll know what it is when you see it) that is repeated every few episodes, which is pretty useless if you're smack dab in the middle of the series anyway (although this series introduction thing takes on a special significance near the end of the anime). The usage of repeated frames in Utena is so prevalent, that they're even used in the second-to-last episode! Still, don't let the animation dampen the experience of a great anime.

Sound

I really wanted to give Utena a 10 in sound, honest! As other reviewers have said, the music in Utena is awesome. Each tune in Utena is catchy (assuming you like J-Pop style music), and will be added to your repertoire of humming music. The opening song stays the same throughout the anime, and while I would've preferred a possible change (it is a 39 episode series after all), the opening is quite solid and catchy. There are a total of two ending songs in Utena, and here's kind of where my sound rating starts to break down. The first ending song was excellent, my favorite song of the series by far, the second song was a bit... odder (and the lyrics show it) and I just couldn't remember it as well as I could the first song. Other than these three songs, you have the duel intro song and the duel songs themselves. The duel intro song is a bit on the odd side, but is still quite catchy (although with all the uses of ''mo'' it sounds like a huge tongue-twister) even though it comes at the expense of a minute or so of repeated footage. The duel songs themselves do a great job setting the atmosphere of the duel.... but other than that, they don't have much worth. The songs themselves are too odd for most to appreciate them as anything but setting music, and you'll often find yourself forgetting the duel music (more on the duels in the Story section). The reason I couldn't give Utena a 10 in sound is the simple lack of good music. While the music in Utena itself was extremely solid, the utter lack of music was disappointing. Only about three songs are very catchy, and out of them only two stand out. While I understand that older anime like Utena didn't have the same technical capability as current anime have today, but a total of two catch songs is a bit... little. Other than that, the background music itself of Utena is excellent, and you'll often not notice the music itself but the effect it has on you, be it suspense, love, or hate. Some of the best music I've heard in anime, but a lack of notable tunes disappoints me.

Story

The story of Utena symbolizes some of the reasons I first started watching anime so long ago. In the beginning, Utena presents you with a very odd situation. As the story progresses, more of the enigmas of the story are explained. Along the way, the central cast of characters also matures (since Utena herself has no idea about what's going on in the school along with you). The story of Utena along with its characters are the main reason that Utena has received so much acclaim and has stayed an anime classic for years. The first episode presents you with a tomboyish Utena, chasing after a Prince from her past (and trying to be one). The plot reveals itself when a love letter Utena's good friend Wakaba wrote to the Seitokai (Student Council) vice president, and her letter is posted on a billboard in public. Defending her friend, Utena decides to challenge Saionji to a duel, since he's known as an avid practicer of Kendo. Saionji believes that Utena is the next Duelist (note the capital 'D') and challenges her to a duel in the forbidden forest behind the school. From here the story starts to snowball on as the true nature of the duel is shown. Without spoiling anything, the duels are simply excuses for character development, but they are often very well portrayed and rarely boring (with the exception of the latter half of the Kurobara (Black Rose) story arc, remember the caveat emptor?). Still, you won't see any spectacular swordplay in Utena (leave that to the pros, like Bleach), on the contrary, the swordplay of Utena is very repetitive and mundane. The majority of the duels intensity arises from the motives of the dueling characters. My only problem with the duels is the lack of talking. If the characters talked a little more (and you'll understand when you see the duels for yourself), the duels could have become much more intense.

And while the story of Utena is extremely deep and convoluted, the crowning jewel must be the ending. Utena's ending happens to be the best fantastical ending I've ever seen in an anime to date. The ending is the perfect mixture of theatrics, stylism, and emotion. The ending of Utena just must be experienced to understand its true power, the meaning it has, and the culmination of the ideas of Utena. And while the ending gives you a lot of philosophical bacon to chew over, the emotion in the ending is perfectly metered. While the ending is quite dramatic, the drama will serve only to heighten the experience. And while Utena's ending will probably raise more questions that it will answer, it's probably one of the best engineered anime endings ever.

Remember the caveat emptor I mentioned waaay back in the beginning of the review? Well, here it comes. Utena itself starts off slow, staying relatively uninteresting till episode 4 or so (which is pretty short in respect to a 39 episode series, but slow nonetheless). The story continues full swing till about episode 12 or 13, when the first story arc ends, and enters the Kurobara arc. The Kurobara arc contains very little plot related information (but does contain some), and mostly serves to develop the characters more fully. The duels in the Kurobara saga take a different twist than what they were before, and the original concept of the Kurobara duels seemed very appealing at first. Unfortunately, this concept degenerates as the same cookie cutter pattern is used on every character in the Kurobara saga, making the latter half of the saga bland and tasteless (the Kurobara saga does contain a pretty interesting side story, but this story progresses *extremely* story). While this may have been ignored if the Kurobara arc was only a few episodes, the Kurobara saga occupies a whole third of the series, creating a definite lull in the middle of the series. Still, the story catches on again at about episode 23 once more, and falls into full swing as the events suddenly get faster and faster (I suggest you give yourself a generous amount of time to digest these episodes, since the action here moves very quickly and plot elements turn on their head in an episode or two, plus the character relationships become much more emotional). Finally, episode 37 leads into a recap episode that sets the pretense of episode 38 and 39 (I highly suggest 38 and 39 being watched at once, since the true flavor of the ending can only be experienced by watching the episodes back-to-back). Coupled with the occasional filler episode in order to break the darker portions of the story, Utena manages to stay upbeat while packing in an exquisite ending.

Character

While the story was the gold of Utena, the characters are Utena's silver (or arguably better than the story itself, depending on how you liked the story). Utena takes a novel approach to analyzing characters. The majority of Utena focuses on those dark portions of the soul that are rarely seen by others, the obsessive and abusive portions of the soul. Each of the characters are realistically flawed, and each of them are at odds with themselves to right the wrongs they've been dealt in the past. Very rarely will you see the actions of these characters *rational*, but they aren't meant to be rational, they're meant to be impulsive and hateful. The duels exemplify these characters perfectly, as they fight for their obsessions and convoluted ideals. To date, Utena seems to be the only anime comfortable enough to venture into these darker portions of the soul and make them the forefront of the anime. The exceptions to this rule are (unfortunately) the main characters Utena and Anshi. Both of their characters remain relatively unexplored till the latter half of the series (Utena's character starts developing near the end of the first story saga, but truly blossoms in the last story arc, and Anshi's character doesen't progress definitively till the last 4 or 5 episodes). Still, this emphasis on the darker part of humanity comes with its detractors. The characters often come out feeling unbalanced, seeming a little too flawed for their own good, a little too possessive. Utena doesen't do enough to portray the main characters in a normal light. If it wasn't for this shortcoming, I would rate the characters in Utena much higher.

Value

Utena is a classic as far as anime go, and deserve to belong on your shelf no matter what you think of it simply for bragging rights (). Aside that, Utena's ending buys it a spot on your shelf on its own, and its incredible story and great characters only accent the experience. Five stars, two thumbs up, ten marks, or whatever other top ratings you want to give it.

Enjoyment

Utena is accessible to all, but contains numerous Shoujo dominant
tendencies. The fan service, the nature of the relationships, and the
lack of depth of the male characters and other characteristic Shoujo
tendencies are prevalent throughout the anime, and are a bit
off-putting for those that don't enjoy the ''girly'' nature of
Shoujo. But, if you can get over this (or if you're like me and enjoy
Shoujo ) then you'll get an excellent story, a phenomenal ending, and
great characters. Utena goes up there with my top favorites, occupying
my number three favorite series of all time.
