Since my first review received critics for being stupid, incoherent and generally nothing but gibberish (LOL, can’t say I can deny that since I used only 15min to write it) I have decided to rewrite it. Hopefully this one is better than the last one, and I will also be very happy to receive any serious comment on my review.


Saikano is a sad love story, which at first may seem a little confusing. It seems like a world not unlike the reality where every day life goes on as it usually does. Yet it isn’t. As the story goes on unexpected things happens, and a world much darker and menacing will slowly reveal it self.

When you begin to watch Saikano, you will probably notice that the anime is drawn in a weird way. And in the beginning it kind of annoyed me. But as I continued to watch I surprisingly found myself amused by it. What I especially liked was that it was all dreamlike-foggy, which I think gave it a soft feeling. I have to say that the reason for this could be the quality of the ripped episodes I have, and may not be in the original one.

Saikano begins where it almost ends, at a special place where Shuji (one of the main characters) waits for someone special. As Shuji sits here alone and waits. The story itself starts at the beginning. At first it looks like a high school love romance story or something like that. And isn’t really any interesting at all. Still, one kind of wonder if the one he waits for will really come.

As the story goes on it will suddenly take a sudden turn from being peacefully to become a story about war, sadness, betrayal and anger. Still, the city where Shuji lives is mostly peaceful, and gives a kind of the last-paradise-on-earth-feeling. And is also mostly detached from the rest of the world, which kind of makes you wonder what on earth is really going on. Why do they fight and who is the enemy?

Although any story about war, sadness, betrayal and anger is sad, Saikano exceeds in my opinion, most of them in a very negative way. Some may find the story tear dripping as it should be. But the intensity of the pain and the sadness which the story tries to emit is so intense and overwhelming that you may find it more ridiculous and cliché-like instead of sad and tear dripping. Off course, there are people who have suffered greatly in our world and could probably identify them self with some of the characters or the pain. But for most anime fans out there, especially the younger ones may not really understand the pain that Saikano tries to emit, less feel any of it.

Although I call Saikano a love story, it seems like the story is more about pain and hardship. And the other elements like the war, love, and the painful experience of the characters. Is more like a fuel to a fire of pain, which has already exceeded its limits, trying to gradually build up an intense sad story

As for the sound and characters, I don’t really have much to say. The music was nice but I can’t really say there was anything special about it. I found the characters mostly convincing. The only exception was Shuji. Shujis pain was so intense that I found myself more laughing than feeling sad, and for my part, it kind of “killed” Shuji totally as a good character.

What more can I say? There is nothing really special about Saikano except that the way it is drawn is kind of weird, and the fact that it tries to emit the viewers an intense sense of pain and sorrow. From an artistic and creative view, there is nothing really special. Most of the characters are done nicely and build up a good foundation for a sad story. But unfortunately, at least for my part, the intensity of pain the story tries to create literarily blew the whole point away. And as a conclusion: best way to know is to watch it yourself. Unless you are not interested in very very sad stories, it is probably a waste of time to watch this one. And I think it’s a “ I hate this or I love this” anime.


Last words I want to say is mostly my thoughts about some things that the other reviewers here have mentioned (in other words, this part is gibberish beyond the last version of the review):

1. As a story with a message (if there is such a thing) Saikano is very vague. Is the message an anti war message? Is it a message that tells us about pain? When I look at Saikano from different interpretations I can see different kinds of messages. Not only a message about the horror of war and the sadness it brings, but also about human weakness. I think that you should find your answer by looking into yourself and your feelings.
2. For those who actually believe that they will gain any experience, and better understanding of real pain, from watching Saikano, please think again. It may be true that Saikano shows a web of feelings and actions, result, cause and effect between peoples who not only know each other but also are strangers to one and other. But so does many other stories to.
3. For those of you who suffer from great depression, and thinks about
suicide more than four times a week, stay clear of this anime. You
might kill your self after watching it.
