A long time ago I reviewed this anime. I was a bit of a neophyte to anime, let alone reviewing. With this review I will attempt to describe truthfully how effective this anime is on the mind and body.

It's a Sci-fi Opera!!!

Shuuji has a girlfriend. Sure, she's cute. She's cuddly. She's really clumsy, and she always apologizes for no reason at all. 
She's Chise after all. Together they go to school, living a relationship that neither are certain is really worth having, and trying to be something neither of them are. 

One day, Shuuji is out with his friends at the mall, hanging out as usual. Suddenly, terror breaks out in the city, as an air raid of an enemy country decimates the city landscape, killing many people around him. Shuuji survives, of course, but only to see in the mist a familiar form holding a frightening weapon...

At first, Saikano suggests a high-school love life, enduring the typical pains that we might see in any romance anime of the day. However, because Chise isn't any particular normal shoujo, the story immediately forces its focus on a couple struggling through a physical and emotional war. Both Chise and Shuuji end up learning many things. As a result of human experimentation and violence, they are forced to mature beyond their own age, and love beyond their own abilities.

What I and many other Saikano fans have found to be so important in this anime is that sometimes love can ONLY be painful. Unbelievably painful! Shuuji forces himself into a deeper relationship with Chise, despite discovering her frightening secret. The story studies this concept, pounding into the watchers' heads that there cannot be a question behind their love for each other. We are forced to accept it, as each episode drags them deeper into an affection that couldn't be accepted as anything else. 

After the first 4 or so episodes, the next set of episodes all start off with some sort of depressing problem. This problem, by a certain means, can only be resolved by either accepting a change in life, or facing a certain death. I am certain many people tire of this series during this section, since the story thins out in order to break down its characters. However, I find it entirely necessary for the pause to make this series as touching as it can be. Specifically, Saikano experiments with binding love, and why sometimes people force themselves into an unsettling lifestyle for that love. It explores the vanity of high-school admiration, and how surprises can rapidly cultivate it into something much more binding and sacrificial.

Towards the end, we watch the couple slowly fall apart, awaiting inevitable destruction. Saikano isn't a mere Sci-Fi romance, it's about a couple who just couldn't win against their love for each other. And in the end, well...that's a conclusion entirely up to oneself to decide. Let's just say that the conclusion ultimately supports the strength of love.

The first fansubbers to handle this series suggested that to see Saikano as a super-happy ending, finish it at episode 10. I find it remarkable that even the fansubbers, whose concern are to translate and release the file, wouldn't control their emotions enough to remain silent about the conclusion. I should warn anyone, though it is on DVD and furthermore extremely popular now, to take caution after episode 10 - there is nothing but tears waiting for you.

Why pick on the animation?

To me, the animation always comes second to literally anything else. So what if their noses bulge out like giant pimples? It's not real in the first place.

All I can say is that the animation definitely gets the point across. Throughout the series, images of school lives and battlefields overlap each other for an effect. This effect cannot be described simply in one single word, but would be better understood as a tool to colorize the emotions within the anime. It first suggests a bright, high-school nostalgic scenery, then would suddenly convert into a blood-coated, horrifying battleground. Soon it paints a battlefield with a rotting corpse, lying beside a cute high-school girl preparing for a gunfight. These sorts of images don't usually mix, but Saikano uses them to deepen the meaning of the characters. Serious issues such as war affect any high-school relationship, and in Chise's case, it turns it into a necessity for her to live. I find it brilliant to illustrate the anime like that, although many would find it to be manipulative and ludicrous.

I should also mention that even if the sceneries aren't that super, even the disproportioned character designs still have qualities! For starters, Chise happens to be the only super-powered shoujo I know that doesn't look overbearing geared up in a giant, mechanized butterfly. Actually, she looks quite fearsome in contrast to her frail human form. Also, a lot of symbolism takes place as well. Think about it - since when would a giant, dominant sort of guy like Shuuji need protection from his tiny, introverted girlfriend? It's proof all in all that the form of power doesn't matter...it's whether or not it's there in the first place.

Last of all, the animation is not immature. There are a multitude of sexual situations and shots of brief nudity. It's about a couple - things like sex and bare bodies are to be expected. Also if you think about it, Saikano focuses quite a bit on the angsty side of their love, so as much as it appears, it's necessary every time.
During fight scenes, it can be fast paced and somewhat graphic. There is quite a bit of blood, and the ruthlessness of the battlefield shows itself as well. At some points, it's so ruthless that the sheer straightforwardness of death leads to laughter. I predict that anyone who sees this will find at least one death hilarious, even though it really isn't.

Thus, the characters.

A friend of mine recently suggested to me that Saikano resembles a character-study, wherein the story isn't nearly as effective as the character's actual feelings. I can agree with this to some degree, despite that I myself find the story to represent something we all have a difficult time accepting - a love that is meant to be, but wasn't meant to work.

Anyways, what makes Saikano so dramatic is it's opera-like representation of two people trying to love each other. Shuuji tries to be masculine and dominant, but struggles to hold himself in place whenever his significant other loses her sense of guilt and innocence. It's a struggle I myself would fear having to bear, yet in the end I might have been the same as he was. Shuuji, I believe, represents many of us males, attempting to love and cover for someone out of our grasp. It's similar to falling for a girl in a different social class; even if the love is there, sometimes there just isn't enough strength on one part to hold the other closely. It's sad and embarassing, and one of the worst things about being a man.

Inasmuch, Chise feels for Shuuji deeply. Throughout the anime her human self decomposes, replaced constantly by qualities of a murderer, or much more like that of a weapon. As her life dissipates, she becomes dependent on Shuuji. However, she doesn't study him carefully enough to see his difficulty in accepting her. I wouldn't blame her, since after spending endless time out on the battlefield murdering the enemy, she'd fall apart in the shoulders of the only innocent part of her life. Ultimately, Chise represents a sort of woman - the type who ends up hurting herself and continuously apologizing to feel better for her mistakes. Some find this to be pathetic and artificial, but I honestly believe it to be much more humble and human, since only God knows what goes through the minds of people who've become a hero in battle against their own will.

And then there are minor characters like Akemi. It's amazing how even someone as insignificant as her could bring all the attention for the infamous episode 9 of this series. Each and every character has significance in this series - nobody is just there to fill in the gaps!

Sound: Actually quite good.

I waited forever for "Hoshi no Hate," which is sung by the seiyuu for Chise, Orikasa Fumiko. For those who've always wondered, this song's opening sequence was played during the end of episode 1. Fumiko has an interesting singing voice, although I think I honestly prefer her voice acting to anything else. I really like the opening theme and the ending theme as well!

Bottom line, Saikano has some of the best BGM sequences ever. It has an awful lot of sad music, and an accent of the electric guitar on a particular lullaby melody that repeats throughout the entire series. Then there is a song with ukeleles and an triangle, a song with heavy synths, and a list of other creative tunes packed into the series. I believe anyone who has a sense of taste in music would find this soundtrack tasteful and original. It touches both the dark and light sides of life, without ever going fully into either feeling.

Of course, how could I not congratulate Fumiko on her excellent work with Chise? I mean, really, this has to be the best work I've seen her in so far. Her voice is absolutely perfect for her character, since the cute tones in her voice hint Chise's character perfectly, without making her look too plushy. Inasmuch, Shuuji's seiyuu takes on a much more boisterous role than your typical teenage shounen, so I give him kudos for his spectacular representation. The voice acting is extremely important in this sort of series, since it's really about the characters, not the action or the animation at all.

It's an anime worthy of the title "ultimate weapon."

If you think you've seen the best ultimate weapon anime yet, make sure to check out this one before crediting anything else! Saikano, better understood as Saishuuheiki Kanojo (literally "The Ultimate Weapon Girlfriend"), holds its ground where most animes like it don't, and takes directions that any good anime does.

For some newbies. In particular, I'd point this out to people who really are interested in seeing a passionate love story, minus all of the flirtatious and indecisive trash. It's about love, how it hurts, and how far it goes. I can find a large crowd, whether they like anime or not who would appreciate this, since many times our society chooses to avoid difficult compilations such as this one.
However, I'd tell people who are looking for a good science-fiction to avoid this one. There is just enough there to retain interest, but it's ultimately there for the drama. Saikano is an opera set in a science-fiction setting, not a science-fiction designed like an opera.

Last of all, don't be ashamed if you don't cry! I know a lot of people
who watched the entire series without shedding a tear, yet felt moved
very deeply by it. I didn't cry much myself, although I was starting
to lose it after episode 10. Ah, oh well - if anything, just enjoy it
because you love it. Even if it hurts.
